over the past week or so investing has
not been a mysterious sport taking place
in the
lofty heights of wall street instead
it's been like a gripping
fast-paced film with an all-star cast in
an ordinary trading day hedge funds can
make huge profits betting against firms
short selling is a way that an ordinary
person can make money from the price of
a stock
falling okay if you think a stock is
going to go up it's obvious what you do
you buy it
the price goes up you sell it you've
made money but what do you do if you
think it's going to fall
well you want to sell it but you can't
sell it unless you have it so the way it
works is first you have to borrow it and
then you sell it
so i think it's easier if you imagine
say the example of a library book okay
you borrow the library book and then you
sell it straight away but remember you
have to give that library book back in
two weeks time and you've already sold
it so what do you do
two weeks pass hopefully the price has
already fallen so you buy it back for
cheaper
you give it back to the library happy
days you're done if the price hasn't
already fallen you might try and extend
that loan
so that's how short selling works but
the stock market has been
far from ordinary what if two weeks
comes
and suddenly the library says you can't
extend your loan so that's basically
what's happened here
these guys already they realized that a
lot of hedge funds had shorted a lot of
the gamestop stock which means they
borrowed lots of it and it sold it
well they said if we buy all the stock
when that loan comes due
and these guys come back saying can we
extend our loan please
we can say no and then basically they'll
have no option
but to buy the stock from us at any
price because they can't borrow again
so you buy it here you push it up to a
much higher price and when the short
sellers come in you sell it to them a
lot higher i know you make your profit
gamestop blackberry nokia blockbuster
and now silver have all been subject to
that exact
process you've just heard the economist
gary stevenson talk about
wall street bets is a popular forum on
social media site reddit
young people with an interest in amateur
investing
swap tips and share their latest trading
antics
mostly using easy to use apps on their
phone like robin hood to get involved in
the market with just a few dollars
the community there noticed that massive
hedge funds like
melvin capital and citron research had
bet against a struggling video game
store called
gamestop with the pandemic hitting shops
like this hard these billion dollar
hedge funds
anticipated that the share price would
just keep on tumbling
and that's when these armchair investors
decided to get involved in a move that
would bring chaos to wall street
[Music]
they collectively decided to buy shares
in gamestop themselves
and as they bought more and more the
share price was pushed
higher and higher and higher
the hedge funds that had bet against
gamestop lost out
big time estimates have placed the total
cost to short sellers at around 19
billion dollars so was this about a few
amateurs on the internet making money
and playing hedge funds at their own
game
or does this spell trouble for wall
street
is trading in meme stocks a bit of fun
or is it
a dangerous game welcome to the sky news
daily podcast with me
dermot murnan
[Music]
is this the small investors sticking it
to the man the
ordinary people versus the hedge funds
well that's definitely how it's being um
being portrayed in a lot of the media
and i can totally understand why
people are loving that narrative gary
stevenson is an economist and former
trader
i mean when you put it in the broader
context of what's happened
last year the the economics of this
pandemic have been unbelievable right
because millions of people stuck at home
here and also in the us can't work can't
make an income
and the stock markets have just been
exploding right tesla's up i think five
times the u.s stock market has nearly
doubled in the last
nine months which is just crazy when you
consider the economic situation right
so there's a lot of people sitting at
home watching the stock markets going
through the roof
they can't even work they can't make an
income it's such a divergence between
what's happening in stock markets and
what's happening in people's lives so
you can see why they want to rush in and
they want to take a piece of the action
but
i think that's maybe a bit of a
simplification and it's probably a bit
more complicated than what's happening
but it also then has combined with the
ability of people to talk to each other
and organize themselves and even if
you've only got a
few dollars or pounds if you join
together in a community through
reddit you can use a very cheap trading
platform
look what can happen yeah and a massive
increase also in
just interest in online trading
generally that has blown up massively um
in the us but also in this country in
the last year and i think it's related
to what i'm saying you know people
i just seen that they're not making
money from their regular jobs now work
is not working for people so they want
to get involved
yeah i mean this what's happened in the
last few last week or so which is
it's known as a short squeeze people
call it short squeeze it's not actually
a new phenomenon it's happened many
times before there was a massive one in
the silver market in the 80s
it's happened in commodity markets like
wheat at times but what is new
is it being centralized on an internet
messaging board and that has sort of
added this whole
crazy element to it let's just describe
the journey though i mean in the scale
of the increase
in the price of game stop stock
was it a year ago under a year ago it
was just over
three dollars a share yeah it's um
it's very difficult to track how much
it's moved because it moves uh
every time you look at it it's a
different place i think at its peak it
was up over 2
000 in about two weeks it was down a lot
yesterday i think so it's
not quite so much but whatever way you
look at it the scale of it
is phenomenal i think it's opened
people's eyes a little bit to
the power ordinary people can have
working together
okay we're characterizing these people
as amateur investors and the vast
majority of them
are they're all connected but it seems
there's some very intelligent financial
brain
spotting the opportunity and then
organizing this
huge wave of people i use this messaging
board sometimes
yes there's a lot of people on there who
um perhaps have quite a simplistic
understanding i mean a lot of people
have bought into this passionate
narrative that it's the ordinary man
fighting the system but the truth is
there are also i'm pretty confident some
relatively professional investors who
have uh
started it off are they in danger up we
know what's happened to the hedge funds
some of them
perhaps got burned they still seem to be
in existence and
one imagines they'll find a way to fight
back and it's on that note
i mean i met a guy yesterday who told me
he borrowed 300 pounds to buy less than
one share
in gamestop and was um i was
recommending me to get on isn't that the
old adage from the wall street crash
that uh
when the shoeshine person tells you to
buy a stock
now is the time to get out yeah you know
what dom i'm really glad you've
asked that because you know i think this
is kind of a it's a good news story for
a lot of people they're happy to see the
ordinary man give it to wall street but
there are real risks here um the stock
has gone up massively
the truth is you know one month down the
line or quite possibly sooner
is almost certain this stock will fall a
lot and
my concern is who's going to be holding
it then because this may have been
initiated by
people who have good knowledge good
understanding but now there's a lot of
people rushing in who
perhaps don't have the best
understanding of financial markets
other financial instruments has become
easier and cheaper for
ordinary people and i think we we
mentioned this platform robin hood
um you can put pennies if you like into
into
shares it's very easy you know what i'm
really really conflicted on this i've
got strong
feelings in both directions because i
come from quite a poor background but i
made my money in the sea
i can see a world in which ordinary
people's wages are not going up and yet
the stock market has gone up three or
four times since 2008 so i can see this
divergence between
what's happening to big investors and
wealthier people and what's happening to
ordinary people and i can totally
understand
ordinary people want to get involved and
they don't like this unequal system
where the rich seem to get richer and
richer and ordinary people's lives
aren't improving
i can see the ability to invest in stock
markets
could be potential for these guys to
help themselves
but the reality of the situation is a
lot of these people are not getting
adequate advice they're rushing into
things like ig index online trading
platforms and the truth is
75 percent of accounts on ig index lose
money
you know that's the majority of accounts
it's very easy to get
sucked into these platforms convince
yourself you're you know
the next wolf of wall street start
trading and
ultimately if you don't know what you're
doing it's very much akin to gambling
and you know
gambling is a dangerous thing it can be
addictive it can destroy people's lives
and families you know and
like i say i understand people want to
be involved people see wealthy people
making money on tesla bitcoin gamestop
they want a piece of action as well but
i would just
again that note of caution please be
careful
never gamble more than you are able or
willing to lose and it is dangerous
you know we talk about the the trading
platform robin hood it's
it's suspended dealing in gamestop and a
lot of people then felt ah the system is
still rigged against us there's an
element of that although i know that
robin hood is saying it was simply a uh
an issue of liquidity wasn't it in that
they had to
pay for the shares effectively before
the money was coming into their accounts
and there was so much money going around
that uh
their their liquidity was a problem you
know i would love to have been a fly on
the wall in um
the offices of robin hood when that
decision was made to stop the trading
because
it has caused a absolute storm on the
internet
and uh there's a lot of you could call
them conspiracy theories going around
about powerful wall street figures being
connected to powerful political figures
um whether that's true or not i honestly
i couldn't comment i'm sure
robin hood themselves would say we're
trying to protect our platform we're
trying to protect our customers and like
i've said there are real risks to
customers
but i can totally understand the traders
you know they've got a lot of money here
they've got a lot of risky they feel
like they're fighting the power and then
suddenly
we were in a situation where the
ordinary traders were blocked from
trading
whereas wall street still had access so
you know i can understand that anger i
can understand that frustration but um
i couldn't tell you for sure what the
real reason why him probably had to stop
and uh a lot of uk companies have also
banned trading now as well in the last
few days
after this what happened on wall street
the moment they realized their
investments were set to lose billions
gamestop's roller coaster stock market
ride may have come to an
end this week share prices plummeted by
more than 58
on tuesday and there are signs other
popular targets like blackberry and amc
entertainment have also
passed their peak but with technology
placing the power of the stock market in
people's
pockets this may just be a sign of
things to come
i was a professional trader working in
the city for a number of years
and you know i'm pretty sure if i were
to have orchestrated something like this
when i was working for an investment
bank
it would have been illegal it would be
market manipulation the question here is
when it's done by a million or
i don't know how many people it could be
millions now across the world doing it
independently
how do you regulate that you know is it
market manipulation who do you punish
there's a big question obviously public
opinion will be against regulation
because they feel it's ordinary people
but
i think the big question is what happens
one month down the line when this where
if this falls 99
and a lot of ordinary people you know
hairdressers taxi drivers
are burnt on this and then you know it's
easy
at the top of the bubble to say don't
regulate it but when the bubble bursts i
think people
might feel differently so i mean i know
i've said it a million times but
the message is be careful but from what
you're saying gary it seems to me okay
the technology is well advanced but it
seems to me
their echo here's back to time
immemorial well perhaps not that far
back but certainly ever since
um humans started trading and dealing
with each other
what do we have south sea bubbles black
tulips uh
you know things like that ponzi schemes
yeah you know what i think is
interesting here i think this relates to
the way
that governments have dealt with the
coveted crisis there's been a huge
amount of spending last year
now normally in a crisis governments
would raise taxation on the richest or
they might borrow a lot of money
for example to fund wars things like
that but what happened last year was
really phenomenal
the government of the uk it spent an
extra 450 billion pounds
that's about 10 000 pounds per adult in
the country and
the bank of england printed the exact
same amount and lent it to the
government which means that essentially
they've dealt with this crisis purely by
printing
450 billion pounds now that might seem
like an amazing way of dealing with the
crisis because nobody has to pay for it
but the net result is you pour a huge
amount of extra money
into society and that has a lot of
problems if you look at where the
money's end up
ended up you can see most of it has
ended up with richer people
so that increases inequality and
inevitably it creates
bubbles in asset markets because these
people are going to invest them my big
concern is that contagious into the uk
housing market
and we've seen house prices rocketing up
in the middle of the deepest recession
ever
my concern is what happens if house
prices double again which ultimately is
what happened after 2008 and what does
that mean for
poorer families trying to get onto the
housing ladder basically if you try and
fix an inequality crisis by printing
money and giving it to the rich
you can't be surprised when that
inequality crisis gets worse we need to
start making the richest people actually
contribute to fixing and paying towards
these crises rather than just profiting
from them clearly
well that's it for this episode of the
sky news daily podcast my thanks to gary
stevenson
and peter tuckman to keep a towel on
this story head over
to our website and our app
this episode was produced by lauren
binkney and nicola ayers
our interview producer is tatiana
[Music]
alderson
you